# **Specializations in computer forensics**

As computer forensics expands into cyber and digital domains, specialization is essential because it's impossible for one person to know everything. Investigations in cyber spaces require expertise in computer networking because monitoring, passing network traffic establishes evidence after a cyber crime happens. This involves looking for traces of crime and all the possible elements of what constitutes a computer network, including computers, switches, and routers. Many computers host programs called servers that provide services to another program or remote users called clients. Servers and clients can both be the origins and the destinations of computer network communications and should be subject to close scrutiny. This emphasis on computer networking is why we collectively call the cyber crime-centric investigation techniques network forensics. One of the conventional subfield of computer forensics is operating systems or OS forensics. The sheer number of different OSs and their versions warrant a specialty. The third primary specialization focuses on the World Wide Web. These days, I find myself doing a majority of my computing tasks in a web browser. I use a web client to check my emails. I edit my documents in Google Docs. I watch videos on YouTube. My Google Chrome frequently takes up over half of the resources on my computer. Just because of the dominance of the web and its applications in our everyday lives, unique web-specific forensic approaches are necessary and are in high demand. Cloud computing is another trend shaping our information technology adoption. The cloud now powers most of the applications we are accessing through the web. Criminals have already started exploiting cloud users, which is why cloud forensics is becoming a major digital forensics subfield. To compromise web and cloud security, criminals sponsor the development of malicious software or malware. The complexity of malware is increasing as law breakers understand its value, and invest more resources in producing more sophisticated attack software. Expert knowledge is a must to address malware challenges in computer forensics effectively. Mobile computing devices have software and hardware characteristics fundamentally different from desktop computers. The form factors are different and so are the OSs, such as iOS and Android. Tablets and mobile phones are quickly becoming mainstream and we spend less and less time on our PCs. We definitely need specialized treatment here, and mobile forensics is a response to this need. Email forensics is the last specialization I'd like to bring up. People spend a lot of their professional lives checking emails, and the same applies to criminals who exchange emails to coordinate their illegal activities. The significance of email and digital forensics is high enough to deserve a specialization. As the information technology landscape changes, digital forensics must keep up with the advancement of the field. Specialization is a coping mechanism and the discipline of digital forensics will become even more diverse. I feel lucky to be part of this dynamic industry of digital forensics.

### **Network forensics**

Network forensics investigates crimes in cyberspace. It focuses on analyzing and monitoring network traffic data exchanged between computing devices with unique addresses. To be able to conduct network forensics tasks, you need to develop significant knowledge in computer networking. Some of the topics to master include the roles of network hardware like switches, routers, and hosts, and various network layers such as physical, data link and application. Others are concepts. A prime example is network architecture, which decides how to assemble different networking hardware components using specific technologies. Understanding a network architecture is equivalent to acquiring a map, which is essential for the searches you need to conduct in a maze of various network devices and appliances. Besides learning the hardware, layers and concepts, becoming proficient with networking software is another crucial aspect of establishing yourself as a network forensics specialist. Therefore, to thrive in this ever-changing field, is operating systems or OSs. They provide baseline networking capabilities that turn your application data into packets and then electrical or optical signals so that they can travel through copper wires or fiber optics cables. Your OSs also allow you to configure your network settings to connect your computer to a local area network, or LAN. If you're not already familiar with basic commands like ipconfig on Windows, or ifconfig on Linux, it's a good indicator that you lack qualifications as a network forensics investigator. After developing proficiency with OSs, a natural next step is to study well-known software tools, Package snippers are one of them. This will throw off investigators and package snippers are what you use to collect and preserve data in computer networks. There are numerous other software tools in computer networking. These are software firewall solutions, intrusion detection and prevention systems, security information and event management, or SIEM applications. I hope you now have a good feel for what network forensics involves. Several digital forensics software products have built-in features for network forensics tasks and require minimum networking knowledge, but much more is needed to dig deeper into the crime scenes in cyberspace. If your career goal is to become a network forensics specialist, I recommend you do everything I've highlighted so far.

### **Operating system forensics**

Operating systems, or OSs, are one of the most fundamental components of digital forensics. We use OSs to control all the digital devices around us. Take your mobile phones. The prevalent OSs that drive their inner workings are Android and iOS. Your favorite digital watches also have OSs. Windows, Linux, and Mac OS power most of the computers in the world. The diversity alone presents a considerable challenge. Each type of hardware can potentially have its own OS, like your phone, watch, and computer. Windows OS has so many versions and you cannot simply ignore its old versions because many of them are still in use. I bet Windows 3.1 is still in news somewhere out there. A more realistic scenario is investigators running into outdated OSs, such as Windows 98 instead of its prehistoric predecessor. The die-hard nature of OSs and their diversity make them even tougher to investigate, and demand specialization. One of the major areas of OSs forensics is file systems, because they store data, including evidence. Although similar, each operating system has its unique way of storing files. This is even the case among different versions of the same OS, like Windows. Have you heard of FAT or NTFS? FAT stands for File Allocation Table and NTFS is an acronym for New Technology File System. Both of them are popular Windows file management systems. Linux and Mac OS have their own. Random access memory, or RAM, is another location where an investigator can find significant data leading to potentially incriminating evidence. Over the years, the capacity of RAM has been increasing and personal computers or PCs often have eight gigabytes of memory or more. You can find lots of valuable data in RAM, including unencrypted encryption keys and passwords. The challenge is that the data in RAM is volatile, which means you lose its content when your computer is turned off. Because of this, you must capture the data while the suspect computer is still on. We call this act of retrieving data from RAM live acquisition. OSs also generate numerous log files with crucial information like time stamps and identities of users. Other areas of OS forensics include virtualization and cloud computing. Many corporations no longer have their server room but outsource their IT to cloud service providers, which use virtual machines to install end users' OSs instead of physical PCs. What I've discussed so far is just a highlight of the fascinating field of OS forensics. You at least need a decent level of competency in OS forensics to qualify as a digital forensics professional because the knowledge is foundational for almost all digital forensics tasks.

### **Web forensics**

Web browsers are a huge part of how we use our computing devices. We check our emails through web applications. We shop online using our web browsers. Online banking is another area where we use web applications. We use web browsers on multiple platforms. They're available on our phones, tablets, and computers. We can also sync multiple instances of web browsers by signing on, which makes web forensics even more relevant. Due to our heavy use of web browsers in our computing experience and on the internet, web forensics has become a significant subfield of digital forensics. One of the web forensics goals is to find sensitive information, such as usernames and passwords. Password management has been a challenge in cybersecurity. Web browsers are trying to help mitigate the problem by allowing users to save their credentials in the cloud. Therefore, full access to a web browser account can unlock many other online accounts a suspect owns. The same, applies to credit card numbers because they're stored as well. Browsing history is another treasure trove of information. Based on the sites of user visits, investigators can tell much about the person, including motives and criminal intent. A lot of what people do is also searching, and the query terms often provide clues to the mindset of a suspect. Although ultimately encrypted to be saved in the cloud, the confidential information; documents, images, videos; data entered into forms, scripts, and executable files linger in a temporary and less secure memory location called cache. Basically, examining web data alone can reveal ton of information on a user, including interests, preferences, beliefs, shopping habits, friends, family, and other social networks. Because of the widespread use and the information-rich environment it provides, cyber criminals frequently launch their attacks against web browsers. You must have heard of cross-site scripting and SQL injection by now. Since these attacks occurred through web browsers, cybersecurity professionals can conduct a web forensics investigation to fulfill an incident response task. The dominance and popularity of web browsers in everyday computing also presents some challenges. An obvious one is their diversity. There are several mainstream web browsers, and they continue to evolve. Encryption and privacy features are others. By using an incognito mode, users can conceal their browsing history. Despite these difficulties, web browsers are still a primary source of evidence for digital forensics. I hope you're intrigued and ready to learn more about them. Web forensics certainly deserves attention in its own right.

### **Cloud forensics**

Cloud computing used to be an emerging technology, but not anymore. It's quickly taken over many aspects of our computing lives. Take file storage. Many of us now have one or more cloud-drive service accounts. I rarely store data locally. This trend implies that digital forensics is no longer limited to local file systems, but must expand its scope to include cloud service products. There are three major types of cloud services. We are most familiar with Software as a service, or SaaS, because of its end-user facing nature. It offers software solutions in web applications like word processors and spreadsheets. Platform as a service, or PaaS, allows a self-contained environment where users can develop and maintain their software services. Web servers, databases, and operating systems are frequently available in PaaS offerings. Infrastructure-as-a-Service, or IaaS, is the most extensive cloud computing option and allows users to build their computing resources by providing virtual hardware. Through IaaS, you can provide your virtual machines, virtual switches, and virtual routers, to name just a few. What's daunting to digital forensics investigators is that criminals also have access to all these different cloud capabilities. Due to the prevalence of cloud computing, the bad guys have a much easier time quickly setting up a computing infrastructure to commit a crime, and destroying it to evade detection, all on somebody else's hardware. What's important here is the actions of cloud service providers to monitor these criminal activities. By now, you know very well that social media sites could become the prime targets of criminal investigations and hold important evidence. Investigators will have very little to work with if these companies don't cooperate in capturing, and detecting illegal activities on their service platforms. Think about the possibility of having to execute a search warrant for an entire data center. There is no way you can do your job effectively without the help of the people managing the facility. This is why rules and regulations are critical in cloud forensics. Without a mandate to help lawful investigators, cloud service providers have little incentive to do anything. In civil cases, you can only rely on basic mechanisms such as service level agreements, or SLAs. Another option is the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, or FRCP. Other than these, there doesn't seem to be too much available to help cloud forensics investigations. Negotiations and legal knowledge, in addition to technical skills, play an essential role here.

### **Malware forensics**

Malware is short for malicious software. Cyber criminals frequently use malware to commit crimes. Computer viruses used to be the majority of malware we encountered, which is no longer the case. Malware has evolved since its first appearance. Many types of malware now exist including viruses, worms, adware, Trojan horses, rootkit, and ransomware. Viruses need human assistance like opening a file while worms can spread on their own through network connections. Adware is less damaging than other malware that destroys information because its goal is to display advertisements. It's annoying but better than losing access to data. Trojan horses appear benign and valuable on the surface, but the software performs steps to inflict damage behind the scenes. Rootkits change your operating system altogether to hide any suspicious activities. Changes are only visible to the installers of the rootkit. Victims cannot detect anything unusual. Ransomware seems to be very active these days. I'm sure you heard about it. They lock your computer and prevent you from using it. Recently, many organizations have been the victims of ransomware attacks. Criminals would ask for ransom money in return for unlocking your computer hence the name ransomware. Much of malware forensics involves capturing and analyzing the software tools used for crimes to understand the scope of damage and to find ways to detect and disable them. One of the most popular tools is disassembler, which allows an investigator to extract source code from an executable file. Having access to source code is like obtaining a treasure map. The source code shows the logic behind malware behavior and sheds light on its evasion techniques. Another vital tool is live acquisition. You want to catch malware red-handed while it's in action, and the best place to do this is the main memory of your computer in which the malware resides and is taking action. After lifting the memory resident binary data that is simply a combination of zeros and ones, you can use a disassembler to dissect the malware you just captured. One of the first steps of malware forensics is to detect malware. A conventional way to do this is fingerprinting, which looks for a static pattern. The assumption here is that the pattern is not changing, which is why we use the term static. Malware is getting smarter and uses various tactics to avoid detection through static analysis, which is why we now need a new approach called dynamic analysis. Observing damaging and deceptive behaviors is crucial in dynamic analysis. Because of the heavy emphasis on examining software, coding knowledge is critical to becoming an expert in malware forensics.

### **Mobile forensics**

Mobile computing devices are everywhere. Mobile phones are quickly replacing personal computers in their popularity and functions. It's now common to confiscate mobile phones and tablets in a criminal investigation. Mobile forensics is a subfield of digital forensics, focusing on finding evidence on mobile devices. The diversity of mobile devices is overwhelming. I've gone through dozens of cell phones and tablets since my first purchase. You've seen many technologies come and go as part of the mobile revolution in our modern world. USB is a good example. I have so many cables at home to connect devices using different USB standards like USB 2.0, USB 3.0, Apple lightning, USB 3.1 type C, and USB 4.0 connectors. The list goes on and on. Finding appropriate cables alone could be a massive challenge for a forensics investigator. This example highlights the importance of tool support for cases involving mobile devices. If a vendor can provide the universal kit with all the necessary hardware to get the data we need out of the proprietary hardware, the investigator's job will be much easier. Therefore, mobile forensics investigators must be proficient with specialized hardware and software tools to do their jobs effectively because having the right equipment or program can make a big difference. Luckily, many forensic solutions companies specialize in mobile devices as shown in this "Gifford Foundation" article. To be competitive, they aim to cover as many technologies as possible, which include various versions of mobile operating systems and different generations of hardware by numerous vendors. There are hardware components unique to mobile devices such as subscriber identifier module, or SIM. Seizing all associated cables and media, like a secure digital or SD memory card, is vital at a crime scene. There are also mobile device specific data to acquire. These include phone books, text messages, call history, location information, Wi-Fi networks, and cell towers used. Due to the diverse nature of mobile devices, it's often necessary to resort to multiple software and hardware tools. Mobile devices require custom seizure and preservation methods. All these distinct characteristics of mobile device forensics demand special training, and justify recognition as a standalone track within digital forensics.


### **Email forensics**

They are also our principle means to reach out to people. Criminals know that we pay attention to email. They try to exploit our increasing dependence on email in our personal and business lives. Take phishing that tries to lure you into visiting a fake website and giving up sensitive information like your social security number or SSN. Emails are its primary attack vector or mechanism. Phishing is a form of social engineering taking advantage of human mistakes in an overall cybersecurity context. Phishing emails can be as simple as someone impersonating your boss and asking for confidential information. Emails can also deliver malware in their attachments. Simply opening an attachment can infect your computer. Since emails are so prevalent during our daily communications, the electronic conversations alone can serve as incriminating evidence. Emails provide credible documentation of how various criminal activities unfolded in an organization in many corporate fraud cases and white collar crimes. One of the major tasks of an email forensic specialist is to find out the true identities of the senders and the receivers of an email and validate the authenticity of a message. We can use metadata to do this. Assuming that our data is email, its metadata includes IP addresses, timestamps, headers, and email clients used. Timestamps establish the sequence of criminal activities, while IP addresses can pinpoint where emails originated. Other significant email data include multimedia content such as web links, pictures, videos, and audio files. Another important email forensics task is keyword searches. The goal is to find the emails relevant to the crime you're investigating. Tool support is essential in making the search process efficient. To retrieve emails and prepare them for an in-depth analysis, it's necessary to know how to work with different email clients. There are characteristics unique to each client, and how they save their emails on local or remote file systems. An effective investigator needs to be fully aware of these details. Typically, emails go through multiple servers to reach their destinations. To make this delivery process happen, email clients and servers use a protocol called Simple Mail Transfer Protocol or SMTP. Because it's so easy to fabricate an email, it's frequently necessary to examine the SMTP logs of the email servers to check its validity. Therefore, email forensics investigation requires you to understand the server side of the SMTP too. Since email systems rely heavily on computer networks and their software applications, including clients and servers, it doesn't hurt to develop knowledge in computer networking. Although we treat it as an independent subfield of digital forensics, email forensics is closely related to network forensics. I would go so far as to say that email forensics is a further specialization of network forensics.

### Ref

https://www.linkedin.com/learning/cybersecurity-foundations-computer-forensics/