### **Certifications**

[\- \[Instructor\] Obtaining a certification is an excellent way to increase your credibility as a digital forensics investigator. There are mainly two different types of certifications out there. One is those provided by tool vendors, the other is provided by professional associations. We'll look into these certifications in more detail one by one. Let's look at the OpenText EnCase Certified Examiner, or EnCE, program first. It requires 64 hours of authorized computer forensics training or 12 months of computer forensics work experience. Next is the certification provided by Exterro. The requirements for this certification include access to Forensics Toolkit, or FTK. This certification provided by Exterro is called Access Data Certified Examiner, or ACE. EC-Council also provides a certification. This one is vendor-neutral and open to the public. The name of the certification is Computer Hacking Forensic Investigator, or CHFI. Finally, there's a certification provided by an organization called the International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists, or IACIS. In this case, the certification is more for law enforcement officers or government employees. The name of the certification is Certified Forensic Computer Examiner, or CFCE. If you decide to become a career computer forensics investigator, consider obtaining one of these computer forensics certifications.](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/cybersecurity-foundations-computer-forensics/certifications?resume=false&u=56745521#)

3\. Preparing for an Investigation 

### **Tools and knowledge requirements**

[\- \[Instructor\] There are some prerequisites to starting a digital forensics investigation. These include basic hardware and software tools, which require significant investments. Maintenance is an important aspect to consider. Hardware needs replacing every once in a while. The software also demands upgrading because new versions are coming out constantly. Managers shouldn't forget the fact that time is also money. Free software sounds good initially, but it could become a time sink when little professional support is available to help the team configure an application properly. It may well be the case that the software becomes obsolete once its development stops due to some obscure problems associated with the project. If this happens, you lose all your investments in the software. For one, your expertise in the software product becomes useless because you have to abandon it and find its replacement. This is why it's always essential to consider the total cost of ownership or TCO when owning hardware and software. Think about all the resources allocated during a solution's entire lifespan when making your important purchasing decisions. Compared to software and hardware, your investments into training and education are relatively safer bets as long as you make sound choices in what to learn. Learning fundamentals like number systems stays with you for your entire career, although updating and upgrading your knowledge is paramount to staying relevant as a digital forensics professional. This is why I'm covering classic concepts like hexadecimal numbers and offset. I call them classic because they'll never become obsolete.](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/cybersecurity-foundations-computer-forensics/tools-and-knowledge-requirements?autoSkip=true&resume=false&u=56745521#)

### **Hardware**

[\- \[Narrator\] There are some hardware tools you need as a digital forensics investigator to function effectively. One of the essential requirements for digital forensics hardware is efficiency, mainly in terms of speed. As a digital forensics investigator, you spend much of your time on mundane tasks, such as waiting for your imaging process to be over and looking for information. You can finish these tasks very quickly depending on how fast your computer is. Therefore, the speed of your digital forensics hardware is critical. Another requirement for your digital forensics hardware is capacity. Your digital forensics hardware demands more memory and storage, as well as extra base and slots. The third requirement is compatibility. In your investigations, you'll come across many different types of operating systems or software applications. There are also various kinds of hardware you'll have to deal with. The next requirement is mobility or portability. When you show up at a crime scene, you have to accomplish some initial digital forensics tasks, which is why some of the digital forensics hardware you carry must be more portable. When in a lab environment, you have access to a full-blown digital forensics workstation. However, at a crime scene, you need a scaled down version of the same hardware, especially a field kit. One of the major elements of the field kit is a laptop configured as a digital forensics workstation. There are also some miscellaneous digital forensics hardware like flashlights, antistatic evidence bags, cameras, chain of custody forms, cables and screwdrivers. Antistatic evidence bags are essential when handling sensitive electronics. Touching electronics with your bare hands can cause a short circuit, making the evidence useless. Using an antistatic evidence bag prevents this from happening. There is a wide variety of specialized digital forensics hardware. What we've discussed so far is an excellent place to start learning more about them.](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/cybersecurity-foundations-computer-forensics/hardware?resume=false&u=56745521#)

### **Software**

[\- \[Instructor\] A huge part of becoming an effective digital forensics investigator, is to be familiar with all the major computer forensics software. There are well-known commercial digital forensics software tools out there, such as enCase, and Forensic Toolkit, or FTK. There are also open source and free digital forensics software. These include Autopsy, and SANS, Investigative Forensic Toolkit, or SIFT. We can also categorize the digital forensics software products based on the comprehensiveness of the features they provide. When an application provides all, or most, of the features necessary for you to conduct a digital forensics investigation, we call it a digital forensics software suite. Software tools, such as enCase, FTK, and Autopsy, fall under this category. There are also computer forensics utilities that focus only on a single aspect of digital forensics investigations. For example, FTK Imager, solely focuses on obtaining an image of an evidence drive. Tools, such as dcfldd, or DD, also provide similar features. Hex Editors allow you to examine your file at a binary level. What's really handy is packaging opensource and free forensics programs into a Linux operating system distribution. This way you don't have to install anything and start using them out of box. The digital forensics OS distributions also offer an isolated environment that's important to prevent tampering. You can install them on a physical machine or virtual machine. My hope is that by the time you're done with this course, you'll have a list of basic understanding of how we use these software solutions in a digital forensics context.](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/cybersecurity-foundations-computer-forensics/software?resume=false&u=56745521#)




